--- Page 1 ---
CO2070 Computer Architecture - 2026 
Department of Computer Engineering 
 
Lab 7 - Building a Memory Hierarchy 
Instruction Cache and Memory 
Once you have the data cache and data memory working properly, use the same concepts to 
add an instruction cache and an instruction memory to your system. Note that you will not 
be using the hardcoded instruction array in your test bench (with #2 time units artificial 
reading latency) anymore. 
Following are the parameters to be used when designing the instruction cache: 
● Instruction word-size is 4Bytes (32 bits), as defined by the ISA. 
● Cache size is 128Bytes 
● Use a block-size of 16 Bytes (∴ cache can hold eight instruction blocks) 
● Use direct-mapped block placement 
● You need to store the corresponding address tag along with every instruction block 
● You need to store a valid bit with every instruction block. At the beginning, all cache 
entries are empty, therefore invalid. 
● Dirty bit and write policies are not needed, as the CPU does not write to the instruction 
memory. Evicted blocks can simply be discarded. 
 
Your instruction words are 4 Bytes wide. The instruction memory should be able to hold 256 
instruction words, making the total size of instruction memory 1024 Bytes. The CPU 
accesses a single instruction word at a time using a 10-bit word address (from the program 
counter) where the two least significant bits are zeros. 
 
The instruction cache should split the address into Tag, Index and Offset sections 
appropriately. Finding the correct cache entry and extracting stored data block, tag and valid 
bits should be done based on the Index. Include an artificial indexing latency of #1 time unit 
when extracting the stored values. Then perform Tag comparison and validation to 
determine whether the access is a hit or a miss. Include an artificial latency of #0.9 time 
units for the tag comparison. 
 
Read hits should be handled asynchronously similar to the data cache, with the only 
differences being the size of the address and word-size. Include an artificial latency of #1 
time unit for selecting the requested instruction word from the block (which can happen in 
parallel to the tag comparison). 
 
In the event of a miss, the CPU must be stalled using a BUSYWAIT signal. Cache controller 
should assert the memory READ control signal as soon as the miss is detected and start 
fetching the missing 16-Byte block from the instruction memory on the next positive clock 
edge. 

--- Page 2 ---
Note that you are given a separate instruction memory module for lab 7, which deals with 
blocks of 16 Bytes. A 6-bit block-address should be used when the cache is accessing the 
instruction memory. The fetching will take a long time (16×5 = 80 cycles), so the cache must 
wait (holding the relevant signals stable) until the memory de-asserts its BUSYWAIT signal 
to retrieve the instruction block. 
 
On the positive clock edge this memory read completes, the cache controller should write 
the fetched block into the indexed cache entry and update the tag and valid bit accordingly. 
Include an artificial latency of #1 time unit in this writing operation. Then the original read 
access can be served by the asynchronous logic, where the status of the hit signal will change 
after further #1.9 time units, and consequently de-assert the BUSYWAIT signal of the cache 
at the next positive clock edge while sending the requested instruction word to the CPU. 
 
Therefore, the total instruction miss penalty adds up 81 CPU cycles. 
 
1. Implement the instruction cache module as specified and connect to the CPU via the 
testbench, along with the instruction memory module. Include a lot of comments. 
 
2. Test your system thoroughly with several software programs. Programs can be 
hardcoded inside the instruction memory module or loaded from a file. 
 
3. Submit a compressed file groupXX_lab7.zip containing your Verilog files with all the 
modules in your design, testbench and screenshots of timing diagrams clearly showing 
signals related to instruction cache and CPU control. 
 
 
Note that any form of plagiarism will result in zero marks for the entire lab. 
 
 
 
 
Have fun coding. May the force be with you! 

